# Market

**Meaning:-** The term "market" refers to the whole region in which buyers and sellers are close in contact to effect purchase and sale of a commodity.

## Forms of Market
- Perfect Competition
- Imperfect Competition
    - (i) Monopoly
    - (ii) Monopolistic Competition
    - (iii) Oligopoly

---

### Definition of Perfect Competition

**Ans Perfect Competition!** - Perfect Competition is the market situation in which buyers and sellers operate freely and a commodity sells at a uniform price.

**OR**

It is the market in which a very large number of firms produce homogeneous goods and sell them at a uniform price.

### Features of Perfect Competition

**1) Very large numbers of buyers and sellers:**
The number of buyers and sellers is so large that none of them can influence the prevailing price in the market. Each buyer and seller buys or sells a very insignificant proportion of the total supply of the commodity in the market. This shows the ineffectiveness of a seller or buyer. In fact, the price is determined by aggregate demand and aggregate supply in the whole industry.

**II) Homogeneous Product:-**
Products sold in the perfect market are homogeneous i.e. they are identical in all respects like quality, color, size, weight, design etc. They are perfect substitutes of one another. The products sold by different firms in the market are identical in the eyes of the buyers. Since, a buyer can't distinguish between the products of one firm and that of another, he becomes indifferent as to the firms from which he buys.

**III) Free entry & exit of firms:-**
Buyers & sellers are free to enter or leave the market or industry at any time they like. New firms induced by large profits can enter the industry whereas losses make the inefficient firms to leave the industry. In case of abnormal profit at the profit max level of output, new firms will be attracted to the industry. This will lead to an increase in supply leading to a fall in price of profit. Thus, the entry process of firms will continue till there are no abnormal profits. On the contrary, if there are losses due to low price, firms will quit the industry leading to a fall in supply. As a result, the price will rise lessening the losses. Thus, the exit process of firms will continue till there are no losses. Hence, free entry & exit imply zero normal profit.

**IV) Perfect Knowledge**
The buyers & sellers have perfect knowledge about the prices prevailing in different parts of the market. All sellers have equal access to technology & input with the result that all firms have uniform unit cost. Clearly, this leads to an emergence of a uniform price of the product.

**V) Perfect Mobility:-**
There is a perfect mobility of goods and factors of production without any obstruction. The factors are free to enter in an industry if considered profitable or leave the industry when remuneration is inadequate.

**VI) Absence of Transport Cost -**
In perfect competition, it is assumed that there is no transport cost for consumers who may buy from any firm. This ensures the existence of a single uniform price of the product.

**VII) Demand (AR) Curve is perfectly elastic || to x-axis:-**
In perfect competition, the demand curve facing an individual seller is horizontal in shape or parallel to the x-axis. The reason is that the firm has no option but to accept it. It may sell as many units of the commodity as it wishes at the price given by the industry.

**(viii) Firm is price-taker & industry is price-maker:-**
In PC, the price is determined by the industry & all the firms accept it.

---

### Monopoly

**Q. Write the definition of monopoly & explain its features.**

**Ans.** 'Mono' literally means 'one', 'Poly' means 'seller', so monopoly means 'one seller'.

**DEFINITION**
Monopoly is a market situation where there is a single firm selling the commodity & there is no close substitute for a commodity sold by the monopolists. It is very difficult for a new firm to enter the monopoly market.

#### FEATURES OF MONOPOLY

**1) Single seller of the comm:-**
There is only one seller/producer of the commodity in the market. As a result, the monopoly firm has full control over the supply of the commodity. The monopolist may be an individual, a firm, a group of firms, a govt. corp. or even the govt itself.

**II) Absence of close substitutes of the product:-**
The product sold by the monopolist has no close substitute. Though some substitutes of the product may be available yet they are not close substitutes. That means that such substitutes are not identical to the product. As a result, the consumer will have to buy the commodity from the monopolist or go without it.

**III) Difficult entry of a new firm:-**
The monopolist controls the situation in such a way that it becomes very difficult for a new firm to enter the monopoly market & compete with the monopolist by producing a homogeneous or identical product. The monopolist prevents the entry of a new firm. This barrier can be economic, institutional or artificial in nature. As a result, a monopoly firm earns abnormal profit in the long run due to blocked entry of new firms.

**IV) -vely sloped Demand Curve:-**
The Demand Curve (or AR Curve) facing a monopolist is negatively sloped which indicates that a monopolist can sell more only by lowering the price. Since the monopolist is the only seller in the market, therefore the demand curve facing him is the market demand curve.

**V) Price-maker with constraint-**
A monopoly firm is the only seller & having no competitor, it can fix the price partially. It has substantial influence over the price of his product by manipulating its supply. It is because of this position, the monopolist is said to be a price-maker.

**VI) Price-discrimination**
Unlike the uniform price at which a product is sold in competition, a monopolist can charge different prices for his product from different persons & in different market areas.

**Types of Price discrimination:**
1) Price Acc. to Person
2) Acc. to Place
3) Acc. to Use
4) Acc. to Time

---

### MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

Monopolistic Competition refers to a market situation in which there are many firms selling closely related but differentiated products. For eg:- Markets of products like toothpastes, shoes, cycles, TV sets etc. are examples of monopolistic competition.

#### FEATURES

**1) Large no. of firms -**
The no. of firms selling a similar product is fairly large but not very large as in perfect competition. Each supplying a small percentage of the total supply of the product. As a result, firms are in a position to influence marginally the price of their product. For instance, among toothpastes of different brand names, Colgate toothpaste sells at a comparatively higher price.

**II) Product differentiation**
This is the most important feature of monopolistic competition. Differentiated products are variants of a commodity. Products are not identical or homogeneous. They are closely related but not homogeneous. Each firm produces the same product which can be differentiated from other firms. Products are not the same but they are closely similar to each other. They can be differentiated from each other on the basis of brand name, shape, colour, quality etc. For instance, toilet soaps like Liril, Hamam, Pears, Lifebuoy etc. belong to this category.

**III) Free entry and exit of firms:-**
New firms can enter the market if found profitable. Similarly, inefficient firms already operating in the market are free to quit the market if they incur losses. It is because of this feature that like perfect competition, monopolistic competition also gives rise to normal profit. Free entry & exit imply that abnormal profit is driven to zero.

**IV) Selling Costs:-**
Selling costs are the expenses which are incurred for promoting sales or for inducing customers to buy the good of a particular brand. These include the cost of advertisement through newspapers, TV and radio, show windows, free sampling, salaries of salesman & costs on other sales promotion activities. These costs are also called advertisement costs - are undertaken to increase the demand for a product or to persuade buyers to buy the product of the firm in preference to others.

**V) Demand Curve**
The demand curve or AR Curve faced by a firm is negatively sloped i.e. downward sloping because the firm can sell more only by lowering the price of its product. The demand curve in Monopolistic Competition is highly elastic due to the availability of close substitutes.

---

### OLIGOPOLY

It is that form of imperfect competition where a few big firms compete for their homogeneous product like cement or differentiated products like cars. There is interdependence of firms with regard to price-output decision. Mostly, prices are stable. Here, entry of a new firm is quite difficult.

#### FEATURES

**I) A few firms:-**
There are a few firms controlling the market. Each firm produces a substantial part of the total output of the industry. The number of firms is so small that an action by one can influence the price by his own. He can provoke rivals to react.

**II) Interdependence -**
There is interdependence of firms in the case of price-output decisions as no firm can take such an independent decision. Interdependence means that the actions of one firm affect the actions of other firms.

**III) Selling Costs**
Heavy selling/advertisement costs are incurred to promote sales.

**IV) Price rigidity:**
Mostly prices are stable since no firm desires to start a price war for fear of retaliation by rival firms. Firms generally keep prices at similar levels to avoid a price war.

**V) Indeterminate demand curve**
No firm can be certain of the demand for its product due to the unsure reaction of rival firms. So the demand curve for its product is indeterminate.

**VI) Group behaviour**
Group behaviour in the form of collective decisions by firms is common. This is the main cause of price rigidity.

**VII) Homogeneous or differentiated product**
The product may be homogeneous like steel or differentiated like cars.

**VIII) Difficult Entry**
Entry of new firms in the industry is difficult. So firms continue to earn abnormal profits in the long run.

**Define Cartel.**
**Ans.** A Cartel is a group of firms which jointly sets output and price so as to exercise monopoly power. e.g. OPEC [Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Companies]

---

### DIFFERENCE B/W PERFECT COMPETITION & MONOPOLY

| | PERFECT COMPETITION | MONOPOLY |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **1.** | A very large no. of sellers of a product. | A single seller (firm) of a product. |
| **2.** | Products are homogeneous. | Product has no close substitute. |
| **3.** | Free entry & exit of firms. | Very difficult entry of a new firm. |
| **4.** | Firm is the price taker, not the price maker. It has no market power. | Firm is the price maker, not the price taker. It has market power. |
| **5.** | Price is uniform in the market. Price = MC. | Due to price discrimination, price is not uniform. Price > MC. |
| **6.** | AR & MR Curve is a straight line parallel to x-axis. AR=MR. | AR & MR Curves are downward sloping from left to right. MR is less than AR. |
| **7.** | In the long run, the firm earns only normal profit. | In the long run, the firm manages to earn abnormal profit. |
| **8.** | A firm has its supply curve. | There is no supply curve since on basis of given price, the firm decides its output & price. |

---

### DIFFERENCE B/W MONOPOLY & MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

| | MONOPOLY | MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **1.** | There is a single firm (or producer). | There are many firms. |
| **2.** | Product has no close substitute. | Product has many close substitutes. |
| **3.** | Entry of a new firm is very difficult. | Entry of a new firm in the market is free. |
| **4.** | Price discrimination by a firm is possible. | Price discrimination is not possible. |
| **5.** | Selling Costs are almost nil. | Heavy selling costs are incurred. |
| **6.** | The dd curve (AR Curve) is downward sloping & less elastic. | The dd curve is downward sloping but more elastic (quite flat) than the one in monopoly. |

---

### DIFFERENCE B/W PERFECT COMPETITION & MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

| | PERFECT COMPETITION | MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **1.** | No. of sellers is fairly large. No seller can influence price & supply. | Each seller has some control over price & supply. |
| **2.** | Products are homogeneous. | Products are differentiated. |
| **3.** | No selling costs. | Significant selling costs for promoting sales through various forms of advertisements. |
| **4. **| Firm is only the price taker i.e. firm can't influence price. | Firm has limited control over price through product differentiation. |
| **5.** | Demand (or AR) curve of a firm is a straight line parallel to x-axis. | Demand (or AR) curve of a firm is downward sloping from left to right. |
| **6.** | Buyers & sellers are presumed to have perfect knowledge of market conditions. | Lack of perfect knowledge since product differentiation influences taste & preference. |
| **7.** | There is perfect competition among sellers. | Both competitive & monopoly elements are present. |

---

# Tools of Monetary Policy

## 1. Quantitative Methods
Quantitative methods affect the volume of credit in the economy. These methods include the following:

**(a) Bank Rate:** The bank rate is the traditional method of credit control used by a central bank. The bank rate is the rate at which the central bank lends money to commercial banks or rediscounts the approved first class bills of exchange and government securities held by the commercial banks. Changes in bank rate affect the money supply in the economy.

**Increase in Bank Rate**
During inflation (i.e., a state of rising of prices), to control the volume of credit, the central bank raises its bank rate. It will increase the cost of borrowing by banks. An increase in the bank rate will then cause the banks to raise the rates of interest at which they lend. This will discourage businessmen and others to borrow from them, leading to a reduction in the volume of credit and money supply.

**Decrease in Bank Rate**
During deflation (i.e., a state of falling of prices), the central bank reduces the bank rate. Borrowing from the central bank by commercial banks becomes cheaper. Commercial banks also reduce their lending rates. Businessmen are encouraged to borrow more leading to an expansion of credit and hence money supply. Output, employment, income and aggregate demand start rising.

> **Box 6.1: Bank Rate, Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate**
> 
> **Bank Rate:** Bank rate refers to the rate of interest at which a country's central bank lends money to member banks for a long period as a lender of the last resort.
> 
> **Repo rate:** Repo rate (short form of re-purchase option) refers to the market rate of interest at which the central bank lends money to banks for a short period. Commercial banks get loans from the central bank by selling securities to the latter. However, this is a conditional loan. The condition is that banks will repurchase their securities after a fixed time period at a pre-determined price. There is no such condition in the case of the bank rate. The RBI has replaced the bank rate with the repo rate to influence the availability of credit and the rate of interest in the country.
> 
> **Reverse Repo Rate:** Reverse repo rate is the rate of interest at which the RBI borrows from commercial banks for a short period. This is done by selling government bonds to banks. The banks utilise the reverse repo rate facility to deposit their short term excess funds with the RBI and earn interest on it.

**(b) Open market operations:** Open market operations (OMO) refer to the buying and selling of government securities (like National Saving Certificates (NSCs)) by the central bank from/to the public and banks. OMO are used to influence money supply in the country. It does not matter whether the securities are bought and sold to the public or banks, money ultimately is deposited in or transferred from the banks. Suppose people buy securities, they will withdraw their money from the banks. And when they sell the government securities the money so obtained is deposited in banks.

**Sale of Securities**
During the period of excess demand or inflation, the central bank starts selling government securities in the market. As a result, the cash resources of commercial banks are reduced and they are not in a position to lend more to businessmen. This reduces the volume of credit and money supply in the economy. The level of aggregate demand starts falling.

**Purchase of Securities**
During deficient demand or deflation, the central bank starts purchasing securities from the open market. Consequently, the excess reserves of commercial banks increase and they give more loans and advances. Thus, when credit is to be expanded the central bank buys the government securities from the market.

**(c) Legal reserve requirements:** Commercial banks are required to maintain reserves on two accounts. One cash reserve ratio and other statutory liquidity ratio.

**(i) Cash reserve ratio (CRR):** It refers to the minimum percentage of total demand and time deposits to be kept by commercial banks with the central bank. A change in CRR affects the power of commercial banks to create credit.

**Increase in CRR**
An increase in CRR reduces the excess reserves of commercial banks and limits their lending power. In other words, the reserves of commercial banks are reduced and they give less credit. CRR is raised during excess demand or inflation. The volume of aggregate demand will decrease.

**Decrease in CRR**
During the period of deflation (or deficient demand) the central bank decreases the cash reserve ratio. A decrease in CRR has the effect of increasing the banks' excess reserves and thus increases their lending ability. Banks now give more credit. Thus when credit or money supply is to be expanded, CRR is reduced.

**(ii) Statutory liquidity ratio (SLR):** SLR is another component of legal reserve requirements. It refers to the minimum percentage of net demand and time deposits which commercial banks are required to maintain with themselves. SLR is maintained in the form of cash or other liquid assets. Change in SLR affects the availability of credit.

**Increase in SLR**
The central bank increases the SLR during the period of excess demand (or inflation). An increase in the SLR, reduces the amount of excess reserves of the banks. This reduces their lending ability to give credit. As a result, the banks lend less. Thus, the volume of aggregate demand will decrease.

**Decrease in SLR**
The central bank reduces the SLR during the period of deflation when the level of aggregate demand is low. A decrease in the SLR, increases excess reserves of the banks and thus increases their ability to give credit. In other words, the reserves of commercial banks are raised and they give more credit.

## 2. Qualitative Methods
These methods direct or restrict the flow of credit to specific areas of economic activities, that is, who should get more credit or who should get less credit. These methods are also called selective methods which include the following:

**(a) Regulation of consumer's credit:** Under this method, the credit given to durable consumer goods is controlled. Durable consumer goods (like motor cars, houses, computers etc.) are purchased under 'Hire Purchase System' and payment is made in installments. In times of inflation, consumer's credit is reduced and in times of deflation, credit is expanded. For checking inflation, the hire purchase system is made limited. Down payment (difference of money or margin money) is increased and the maximum repayment period is reduced. On the other hand, the central bank reduces the amount of down payment and raises the maximum repayment period during the period of deflation.

**(b) Regulation of margin requirements:** Margin requirement refers to the difference between the amount of loan granted and the value of security offered for the loan. Margin is necessary because if a bank gives a loan equal to the full value of the security, then the bank will suffer a loss in case of a fall in the price of the security. The central bank influences the availability of bank credit by changing this margin requirement. For example, suppose for a given house the central bank allows only 70 per cent of the value of a house to be given as a loan. The margin requirement in this case would be 30%. If the flow of credit is to be expanded, this margin may be reduced to 20%. Now people will be more willing to purchase a house, as they would get 80% loan of the mortgaged property.

**(c) Credit rationing:** Rationing of credit is another instrument of selective credit control. It aims at limiting the maximum (ceiling) amount of bank loans and advances. Rationing of credit may take the following two forms :
(i) the central bank may fix the maximum amount of loans and advances which can be given by a commercial bank.
(ii) the central bank may fix the maximum ratio of loans and advances of a commercial bank to its total deposits.

**(d) Moral suasion:** Under this method, the central bank adopts the policy of persuasion and pressure on the commercial banks in order to get them to fall in line with its policy. The central bank frequently announces its policy and urges the commercial banks to adopt it. This is exercised through letters, discussions and directives to the banks. The member banks generally do not ignore the advice of the central bank.